Good morning.
Welcome to
Building Great Java Applications
on Mac OS X.
I'm Mike Swingler,
and I am the lead runtime engineer
for the Java team here at Apple.
And today we're going to talk about
some things that you can do to
customize and tweak your applications
to make them look great on Mac OS X.
But we're also going to talk a little
bit about the tools that Apple provides
for building your Java applications.
We're also going to talk a lot
about 64-bit and what that means for
building and deploying your apps and
some steps you might have to work on.
And we're also going to have some
guest speakers to come up and
talk about the future of SWT and
what that means with 64-bit.
In addition,
we also have another guest speaker
coming up to talk about the new
out-of-process applet plugin and
how that works with 64-bit as well.
Then finally, I'll finish up with Mac app
essentials and sort of what you
need to get your application going.
So, let's get started.
I'm Mike Swingler,
and I'm the lead runtime engineer
for Building Great Java Applications
on Mac OS X.
So starting off with tools,
there's three major things that you need
to know about tools that Apple provides.
The support that we give you
to build your application,
all the various debugging tools
we have available on our platform,
and some really awesome performance
tools we hope you'll use in early
bring-up of your application.
So to start off with building,
what we use internally in Apple and we're
transitioning and migrating onto is Ant.
Ant build targets are universally
understood by all Java IDEs,
Eclipse, NetBeans, IntelliJ.
It's really the common denominator that
all IDEs on every platform understand,
and it's something that
we're moving to in Eclipse.
I'm sorry, in Xcode.
We use Eclipse a lot internally, too.
We're using internally in Xcode in
order to build the JDK itself as well,
because the jam targets that
are in Xcode are legacy,
and they will be being removed at some
point in a future version of Xcode,
simply because it just doesn't make
sense to support a totally proprietary,
single-world system that
only works inside of one IDE.
So if you have any targets,
you should migrate those soon.
So in order to do that,
one of the new features we
added in Mac OS X Leopard's
Xcode is the organizer window.
And if you go up to the
window menu inside of Xcode,
open up the organizer,
you click on the little plus
down there at the bottom,
and that's your starting point for
all new Java applications on Mac OS X.
You can build the standard
templates for applets,
web start, command line.
But this is also your
starting point for JNI.
And this is very important if
you have any JNI to use the new
ant-based Xcode template and
use it inside of the organizer,
because the organizer will put down
all of the sub-Xcode prods that you
need in order to build that JNI.
Moving on to debugging,
we have some really awesome tools
available inside of Mac OS X built
into the kernel to support
debugging your Java applications.
So DTrace is a technology
we use from Sun,
that we've adopted from Sun,
to actually probe down all the
way from the system kernel calls
through the native parts of Java and
native applications all the way up
to over 508 unique probe points in
Java that we have available in Java 6.
This is available on
Mac OS X Leopard and also in the
Snow Leopard preview you have.
And just to also mention that
any new tools that Sun adds.
You know, JMap, JStack, Jhat, JConsole,
anything else that they incorporate
into future versions of JDK,
we'll pick those up along as well.
So for performance tools,
we've had a really great performance tool
built into Mac OS X Leopard since 10.2,
and that's Shark.
And currently right now in
the Snow Leopard preview,
Shark works for 32-bit Java processes.
We're working on 64-bit,
but Shark continues to be a really
great tool at diving into getting to
the very detailed hot points of not only
the native part of your applications,
but also the Java stack
call traces as well,
and really gives you some really
great analysis that's just really
not possible in any other tool.
But we've also added another
tool in Snow Leopard,
in Leopard actually,
and that's Instruments.
Instruments takes a kind of higher
level view and allows you to not only
look at the thread states and stacks
inside of your Java application and
actually see what sort of locks that
you're finding in your application,
but also see what sort of locks that
you're finding in your application.
So that's a really great tool.
And then we've also added a little
bit of a So if your application is
triggering something that causes
a lot of disk paging or you see
a lot of disk IO or network IO,
Instruments is a great tool to
help sort of visualize what happens
at a high level on the machine
as you're running your application.
That basically are some of
the tools that we provide from
Apple on the Developer Tools DVD.
And now I'd like to
invite Pratik Solanki,
our virtual machine engineer,
to come up and talk about what
64-bit means for your app.
Thank you.
Good morning, everyone.
My name is PratiK Solanki,
and I work on the Java VM team
over here at Apple.
So I'm here to talk to
you about the 64-bit JVM.
So we're going to talk about what
64-bit means to you as Java developers.
We're going to discuss some of
the performance characteristics
of 64-bit and then tell you how
you develop and deploy for 64-bit.
So let's get started.
Let's get started.
What is 64-bit?
Well, at the low machine level,
64-bit means that the number
of bits that your processor has
to address memory has doubled.
It's gone from 32-bit to 64-bit.
But you guys write Java code.
So what does it mean for you?
Java doesn't expose
your native C pointers,
and the Java code is pointer agnostic.
So your transition to 64-bit
should pretty much be done.
Your pure Java code
should need no changes.
I mean, the Java class file is,
in a sense,
the ultimate universal binary,
and that should just continue to
run great when you move to 64-bit.
But what can the Java code do now?
Well, for one,
since your process now has a
huge virtual address space,
your Java heap size can
just grow like crazy.
I mean, you could go up to 127 terabytes
of heap in the 64-bit world.
And some of the...
Some of the things that you could do
once you have such a huge heap is you
could cache whole databases in memory.
You could allocate huge
memory-mapped NIO buffers,
which will allow you
to do gene sequencing,
image file processing.
A variety of things are now
available to you in 64-bit.
So I said before that
Java doesn't expose pointers,
but really the Hotspot virtual
machine uses a 64-bit value to
store your Java object reference.
So what that means is the size
of your Java objects will now
increase when you move to 64-bit.
We don't expect that they'll just
double because you have your basic data
types like ints and longs and bools.
But on average,
we think about a 30% increase in
size of your Java objects when
you move from 32-bit to 64-bit.
And what that means for you is if
you have ever in the past added
flags to set the minimum and
maximum size of your Java heap,
then you would need to go back
and remeasure the amount of heap
that your application is using and
update these XMS and XMX flags.
And, you know, once again, you know,
maintain good memory behavior.
Just don't increase it to 127
terabytes just because you can.
You know,
your machine will start trashing and your
performance will just go down the hill.
So continue to use the smallest
Java heap that you need.
The direct impact of having such
a huge heap and allocating so many
more objects is that your garbage
collection times will now increase.
So expect that if you're
allocating a lot more heap space,
your GC will take a longer time to run.
But there's a workaround for that.
We have in Java alternative
garbage collectors available.
We have the concurrent mark and sweep and
the parallel garbage collector available.
Take those out for a spin and you
should see a reduced GC pos times.
So we talk about speed.
We talk about the memory.
Now, let's go over to speed.
What happens to the speed of your
application when you move to 64-bit?
Well, another key thing that doubles
when you move from 32 to 64
is the number of registers.
The number of registers in 64-bit is
twice as much as the ones in 32-bit.
And what that means is the Hotspot
virtual machine that's running
your code can now cache more of
your variables into registers,
and that improves the speed
of your Java application.
The other key thing that
changes when you move to,
The other key thing that changes when
you move to 64-bit is the hotspot
compiler changes from underneath you.
In 32-bit, the default compiler
is the client compiler.
When you move to 64-bit,
the server compiler becomes the default.
The hotspot server compiler is
a highly optimizing compiler.
It has vastly improved code generation.
So as a result,
your code should just get faster.
So let's check it out.
We looked at a popular JVM benchmark.
And when we compared the default
32-bit to the default 64-bit,
we saw around a 35% increase in speed.
You know, code just got faster.
When we dug deeper into, say, SciMark,
another popular benchmark,
we saw that the 64-bit VM performed
about 61% faster than the 32-bit one.
You know, your app may vary,
so please measure and see
how your app does in 64-bit.
But we expect that things
should just get faster.
So this was what 64-bit
means and what it is.
Let's take a look at 64-bit in the
two OSs that you have in your hands.
So let's take a look at Mac OS X Leopard.
As you know, last October,
we shipped Mac OS X Leopard
with complete 64-bit support.
What that meant is all of our tools
and frameworks were 64-bit ready.
And Java being just another framework,
and Java being a core
framework of Mac OS X,
we shipped it with Intel 64-bit support.
We had Java SE5 available
for Intel 64-bit,
and earlier this spring,
we also shipped Java 6 with Intel 64-bit.
But the key thing to remember
on Leopard is that all your
apps run in 32-bit by default.
And what that means is that
32-bit Java SE5 is the default
VM on Mac OS X Leopard.
When we move to the Snow Leopard
developer preview DVD that you got
in your hands yesterday or today,
all of our tools and frameworks
are still 64-bit ready.
You know, they're just better now.
You know, more bug fixes have gone in,
and they work even better.
The Java that's on that DVD is Java 6,
and we have Intel 64-bit and
Intel 32-bit support in Java 6.
But the key thing to remember,
the key difference for Snow Leopard is
that apps will run in 64-bit by default,
which means that...
64-bit Java SA6 is the default Java for
Snow Leopard on capable hardware,
of course.
So I said before that your pure Java app
should just run great in 64-bit.
Well, what if your Java app diagram
looks something like this?
What if your Java app had a
JNI library that it communicated to,
which communicates directly to the OS?
When we switch the
VM from underneath you,
you'll start getting an
unsatisfied link error,
and that is because your library
doesn't have a 64-bit component to it.
So you need to recompile your library
to be a universal JNI library.
You need to add the Intel 64-bit
support to your JNI code.
And the way you do that
is you open up Xcode,
you take a look at your
JNI library target,
you do a get info on
that JNI library target,
and you checkmark the 64-bit box.
And Xcode will compile your
library for 64-bit support.
What Xcode is doing,
under the covers for you,
is it is adding a dash arch x86-64
flag to the GCC command line.
And this is what you have to do if
you're not using Xcode and you're
compiling it on the command line
using a make file or any other means.
You need to add the dash arch x86-64
flag to your GCC command line.
All right.
So, you know, you develop your app,
you've got it all running, you test it,
you make sure it all runs great.
Now you want to deploy it.
So let's take a look at that.
One important thing is,
on Leopard and Snow Leopard,
the Java Preferences app that
we ship impacts the version of
Java that gets used to run your app.
What that means is,
any user may select or may choose the
64-bit JVM to be their preferred JVM.
And that means that your app might start
running in 64-bit without you knowing it.
So if you need to override it,
normally this should just work great,
but in case you need to override
this and you need to tie yourself
to a specific architecture,
you need to ensure that you pass
the dash D32 or the dash D64 flags
to your Java application so that
it runs in the mode that you want.
If you're a bundled application
on the Mac and you want to
prefer a particular architecture,
you need to add the JVM Arches key
to your Info.plist that's sitting
in your bundled application,
and you need to specify the
architectures that you prefer.
So here's an example of a great app
that prefers the Intel 64-bit version of
the VM in preference to the 32-bit one.
And if you don't need or if
you want to run in 32-bit only,
then you can get rid of the
x86-64 from the JVM Arches field.
Another popular way to deploy
applications is JNLPs or Java Web Start.
And if you want to run in
64-bit using Java Web Start,
then you need to pass the dashed
D64 argument in your JNLP file,
in the Java VM arcs
field in your JNLP file.
A fourth way of deploying
applications is applets.
Currently, you know,
Ken will have more to say about this,
but currently, as things stand right now
in Leopard and Snow Leopard,
applets run in the address
space of the browser.
And what that means is,
if you want to run a 64-bit Java applet,
you could run it in any 64-bit browser.
The problem, of course,
is there are no 64-bit
browsers right now.
So, if you want to test this on Leopard,
you need to build your own example code.
You need to build your own mini-browser,
and the example code for that is in
slash developer examples web kit.
You need to build it for 64-bit,
and then you should be able to test
your applets on Mac OS X Leopard.
When we move to Snow Leopard, though,
the story is better.
We've got Safari that's
Intel 64-bit capable.
Not by default,
but it still can run in 64-bit.
And if you want to run it in 64-bit,
you need to do a get info on the
Safari app icon and uncheck that.
Open in 32-bit mode flag.
Once you do that,
Safari will start launching in 64-bit,
and you should be able to
test your applets with it.
So going over deployment again,
if you're a pure Java app,
your work is done.
You don't have to do anything.
If you've got native code,
please recompile.
Add the Intel 64-bit slice
to your JNI libraries.
64-bit is here,
and we believe that your Java app
should work great in 64-bit.
You shouldn't have to do anything.
You should just continue
running in 32-bit or 64-bit,
irrespective of what the user chooses.
Leopard defaults to 32-bit,
and Snow Leopard defaults,
the Snow Leopard preview DVD that you
have right now defaults to 64-bit.
and only if your app really requires it,
only if you really need to use a specific
architecture should you use the -t32
or the -t64 flags or set a preferred
architecture in your Info.plist file.
And if I haven't said
this enough already,
please recompile your
JNI libraries to be universal.
Please add the Intel 64-bit slice to it.
So speaking of making your
native code universal,
I'd like to invite on
stage Scott Kovatch,
who's going to talk about Eclipse
and the SWT and their move to 64-bit.
Thanks.
Thank you.
So for those of you who were
here last year and are thinking,
something's different about him,
you're right.
I'm not on crutches.
Right?
Thanks.
So I'm here today, actually not really as
an employee of Adobe,
but I'm speaking more
on behalf of Eclipse.
I'm currently a committer
in the SWT project,
and today what I want to talk
to you about is what Adobe cares
about Eclipse and what Eclipse
cares about for the Mac platform.
So we'll get started.
I think everybody in this
room knows about Eclipse.app.
I think we all know that
it's a great Java IDE.
I think you probably also know
that it's a great platform for
building a rich client application.
Eclipse has plenty of infrastructure
to let you manage resources
within your application.
It has the SWT and JFase
for user interface.
It's also got a number of other
facilities for dynamically
loading in plugins as needed
for your particular situation.
Eclipse is also a great framework
for building an IDE for any
language you can think of.
I mean, there's projects out
there for Python and Ruby.
There's a very active C community.
But the one I want to talk to you
about briefly is ActionScript,
which is the foundation of Flax.
which is Adobe's user interface
solution for enterprise development.
What you can do in Eclipse is you
can build in all the support for the
syntax highlighting for your language,
support for external compilers.
For Flex, that means we call out to
the Flex SDK compilers.
And also provides you with some
framework for doing GUI layout.
And just very quickly,
I want to show you some
screenshots of... I'm sorry,
jumped ahead of myself here.
But first of all,
Adobe took advantage of all of this and
produced a product called FlexBuilder.
And this is an IDE that
we came up with for Flex,
and it's all based on
the Eclipse toolset.
The first version that really gained
a lot of traction and was really
made heavily use of the current
release of Eclipse was FlexBuilder 2,
which came out two years ago.
And that was the first IDE that targeted
version 2 of Flex and ActionScript 3.
And if you have some time,
you might want to look into
ActionScript 3 and see why it
fits in so well with Eclipse.
But earlier this year,
FlexBuilder 3 came out,
and that now targets
Flex version 3 as well,
which is what I'm going to show
you here in these next slides.
So here you see we've got
some ActionScript code up
in the top right window.
And as you can see,
this is Eclipse running on a Mac.
And I should say that this is Eclipse
3.4 with a not-quite-yet-released
version of FlexBuilder.
But as you can see,
there's not a whole lot of difference.
It doesn't really change
how it fits into Eclipse.
But as you can see up on the top left,
we've got a collection of code,
the standard Eclipse project layout.
Down here we have an outline
view on the bottom left,
and up in the code you can see how
we've highlighted the syntax of the
keywords of the ActionScript language.
And this takes some work,
but if you're working on implementing
your own language support,
everything's there for you to do it.
Next,
we have the Flex layout design view.
And I've taken this shot from one
of the Flex sample applications,
but on the right, you see a collection of
property editors specific to
the component that's selected.
You know, all of this is done in
Eclipse and with the SWT.
And you see some of the collection
of widgets you can use in
Flex to build your application.
And last of all, script debugging.
The debugger infrastructure in
Eclipse is fully extensible,
and we've written our own debugger
that works with the debugging version
of the Flash Player to debug your
ActionScript-based applications.
All right,
so all this is great and wonderful.
And you're thinking, okay,
he just gave me a commercial
for Flex and FlexBuilder.
But I'm actually telling you
these things for a reason.
What's this got to do
with the 64-bit world?
Well, everything you saw on the
screen is written in the SWT,
and the SWT is currently
written to the Carbon API set.
As you've heard this week,
and as you're going to continue to hear,
there is no Carbon support for the
visual portions of the SWT in OS X.
and That's currently true on Leopard
and it's true on Snow Leopard as well.
Now it's great that there's a 32-bit
VM now for Intel on Snow Leopard.
So that means that you can run
Eclipse today right out of the box
on the Snow Leopard that you got.
Doesn't help you on Leopard yet.
and there's just no
other way to describe it.
And he's carrying a
32-bit briefcase of fail.
So where does Adobe fit in all this?
Well, as you can see,
I think you can see that we consider
the Mac platform really important
to the future of FlexBuilder and to
the future of our development tools.
and we have made Eclipse a key
part of our product strategy.
There's FlexBuilder,
there are some other additional
products coming down the pike
that will also be Eclipse-based.
So this is really, you know,
a very clear part of what's important to
Adobe for its customers down the road.
And, okay, great, you know,
Adobe uses Eclipse, so what?
Well, how are we going to prove that?
Well, as you've heard earlier,
there's an SWT port to
Cocoa going on right now.
The IBM engineers working on the
SWT came out to Apple last fall
and really got things going.
They made a decent amount of progress.
There's a lot of nice demos you
can take a look at and see what
progress has been going on.
But, you know,
it needs a little momentum.
You know, the more people start
working with it and using it,
the better it is for the project.
So I'm here to say that Adobe is going
to give this product some momentum.
We're going to actively contribute
to the port of the SWT on Cocoa.
We're going to dedicate
at least two engineers,
possibly more.
And because this is open source,
you know, the best I can say right now is
we will contribute to the port,
but our ultimate goal is to
actually lead the effort,
right?
My main job for the next six months
will be actually actively working
on this and keeping it moving.
We're also going to have, as I said,
other Adobe engineers who will be
working out on and actually using what
we build for the SWT in Adobe products.
So, that's sort of our big
announcement for this week,
and unlike just about
everything else you've heard,
As far as the future of Java,
which is NDA, this is not NDA,
this is public.
We're gonna announce it on
the Eclipse mailing list,
things like that,
and feel free to let other people
know that that's what's going on.
So, if you want to get involved,
what's going on so far?
Now, this is just an announcement.
It's not an actual please-go-download-it.
Well, actually, you can download the code
and get things going.
But, just to sort of tell you
where we are right now,
we're really ramping up right now.
I'm currently attached to some
other tasks at work right now,
but we're going to really get things
going by the end of August of this year.
The goal is to get this
in the Eclipse 3.5 stream.
All this work will forward
to the Eclipse 4 stream,
if you've been reading about Eclipse 4.
And we've been pushing some new
features in Eclipse 4 SWT as well
that you can read about them online,
but I think we're going to be able
to make good use of them on the
Mac for Adobe products as well.
We want people to help.
We don't want this to be
an Adobe-IBM collaboration
or an Adobe project.
There's been some interest so far.
Hopefully, if we get more momentum,
more people will sort of get on the
train and come along and help out.
So the way to do that is to start
by going to the URL that we showed
you earlier about the CocoaPort.
That's got all the information
of where we are so far,
how to find bugs, how to fix bugs,
how to get involved that way.
Important that you,
if this is important to you
and you want to get involved,
join the platform SWT dev mailing list.
That's where all the communication
is going to go on between
Adobe engineers working on
this and people across companies.
We're going to keep it
all out in the open.
And of course, file and fix bugs.
You'll be able to get the code yourself,
you'll be able to use the nightly
builds and put it in your stuff,
and that's the best way things will
get fixed and get taken care of.
And with that,
I'm going to talk to you a little
bit about how applets are going
to move forward on Snow Leopard.
I'm going to bring up
Ken Russell from Sun,
and he's got some very cool
demos to show you here,
as well as some other things as well.
Hi, my name is Ken Russell.
I work at Sun Microsystems,
and I'm here today to talk to
you about the next-generation
Java plugin and what does this mean
for Java deployment in the web browser.
Over the last year at Sun,
we've been doing a ground-up
rewrite of the Java plugin.
This is the piece of software that
makes applets run in the web browser.
There's one major architectural
change with this rewrite,
and that is that the applets are actually
no longer executed in the same operating
system process as the web browser.
So on every platform,
the new Java plugin spawns
one or more JVM instances,
and it's in those separate processes
that the applets are actually run.
They're not executed in an embedded
JVM inside the web browser anymore.
From an architectural standpoint,
this is very similar to how
Java Web Start technology works,
except, of course,
that applets have a much
stronger tie to the web browser.
And one point to make is that
multiple applets are still
executed in the same JVM instance.
So you have the same
sharing characteristics,
the same footprint characteristics,
as you would with the
previous Java plugin.
There's just this separation.
Now, why would we embark
on this major rewrite?
One big point to make is
that the Java platform is a
complex piece of software,
and the web browser is a
complex piece of software.
And when you wed them
together very tightly,
you sometimes get second-order
effects that you don't expect
in terms of reliability.
So by very clearly defining
the interactions that
Java and the web browser have,
we have achieved drastically improved
reliability on all platforms for
Java deployments in the browser.
Another point to make is that the
user experience is very important.
to make is that the user
experience is improved.
Applets are now launched
in the background.
So your web page comes up,
your HTML content is rendering,
and if your app takes a while
to load it just pops into
place as soon as it's ready.
The web page and scrolling and everything
is working just fine right off the bat.
The Java JavaScript communication
has been improved,
there are more features,
it is more portable,
and the document object model support
in Java has also been improved.
So you can very easily and powerfully
manipulate the web page that you're
contained in from within your applet and
that now works reliably and portably.
We've also improved the support
for web services by bringing in the
cross-domain dot XML connection model
and this makes it very easy to access
services like Flickr and Picasa and
others from within your Java applets.
But the main reason that we did this
rewrite is the thesis that applets
should be as powerful as applets.
So we've also improved the support
for web applications and this
sounds a lot like Java Web Start.
So in the new Java plug-in you can
define an applet using a JNLP file which
is the same descriptor that you use
when you write a Web Start application.
This gives you a lot of advantages.
Number one is that you have a
finer grained security model.
You can on demand request things like
I want to print or maybe I want to
store a little persistent data on the
disk and you don't have to go through
the process of signing your applet.
You also get support for the
Java Web Start APIs like the
persistent service and others.
Another major advantage is that
you can trivially use advanced
extensions like for example
Java OpenGL bindings within your applets.
So it's really easy to pull these
into Web Start applications.
Now it's just as easy to pull them into
your applet content in the browser.
You get really cool stuff
like per applet JVM arguments.
So if you have a really sophisticated
applet you can say I need a
bigger heap for just this applet.
That will be honored.
You can even request a
per applet JVM version.
So if you're an enterprise customer
and you built your app using five
updates something and you say well
just for understanding that I'm on the
right platform I want that applet to
run with that version you can request
this and the plugin will honor it.
So this is how the integration occurs.
You actually just use an applet parameter
to point off to the JNLP file and the
new Java plugin recognizes that and
then it launches based on the JNLP file.
So this is how the integration occurs.
And this is roughly what it looks like.
If you've written Web Start apps
this is no big surprise.
So first you have the
information section.
It gives your company and
title and stuff of your applet.
Then there's the resources
section which describes the jar
files that you use in your app,
the Java version that you want,
any extensions like Joggle or something
that you might want to pull in.
And finally this is how
you describe your applet.
And if you were writing a
Web Start application you would
use the application desk tag here.
This is the JNLP spec because
we're writing an applet.
Now I'd like to point out that we
actually have some very interesting
stuff to show you today thanks
to a great collaboration with
the Java and Safari teams at
Apple between them and Sun Microsystems.
We have a prototype to show you.
This is only a prototype.
Let's go to the demo machine.
But there's still some pretty interesting
characteristics to talk about.
All right.
So this is Leprechaun.
This is actually not even Snow Leopard.
This is Leopard and this
is a 32-bit Safari browser.
So we can do something like
load up a little clock.
Okay.
Here's our clock.
Not very exciting, okay?
But what we can show is
that scrolling works.
Clipping works.
Okay, so if we occlude the applet, okay,
everything is working
correctly as expected.
Okay.
One interesting point is
that this is actually running
in a 64-bit JVM right now,
even though the browser is in 64-bit.
And you get this advantage
because the applets are no longer
executed in the same operating
system process as a web browser.
So the browser side just
launches a 64-bit VM by default.
So pow, instant 64-bit capability.
Now, let's say that something
goes drastically wrong.
And I don't like to advertise this.
You know, we certainly don't like to say,
hey, this is really likely to happen.
But on the off chance that
something goes really drastically
wrong with your applet,
or maybe it pulled in a native
code library that did something
bad and the JVM crashes,
okay, let's see what happens.
Okay, so we can actually mimic
this by simply doing.
Kill all Java.
Okay, so we do that.
Now, what happens?
The applet disappears,
and the web browser is unaffected.
This is the major advantage of moving the
applet execution out of the web browser.
Okay, and all we have to do
is reload the web page,
and the applet comes back.
Okay,
so now we have rock-solid guaranteed
reliability of Java content
executing in the web browser.
Okay, now let's see what kind of advanced
and really sophisticated content you
can get with the new Java plugin.
Okay, so this is the really fantastic
WorldWinds Java software developed
by NASA Ames down in Mountain View.
And you've probably seen this
before in some form or another.
They've had this on their webpage.
This is an open-source project.
It's written in Java.
It's pure Java,
and it provides you with just
amazing Earth globe that you can
embed in your Java applications.
Okay?
What we're showing here is the
same software embedded as an applet
on a webpage and showing you the
integration that you can get.
You know,
this is really Web 3.0 kind of stuff.
Okay?
Now, what we have is some text
from Wikipedia describing the
Pacific Cascades mountain range.
And the HTML links that are on this page
are actually little JavaScript callbacks.
So let's see what happens.
We can go here and click Mount Rainier,
for example.
The software navigates over
and shows you where that is.
You can go to Mount St.
Helens.
[Transcript missing]
All right, this is fully portable.
Okay, no longer are you constrained
to one particular platform if
you wanna get virtual earth
capabilities in your webpage.
This already works on
every other major platform,
and now we're proud, really proud,
to be able to show you this
running seamlessly and with
full performance on Mac OS X.
Okay, let's take a look at another demo.
A few years ago,
a bunch of really crazy guys in
Germany took the GPL Quake 2 source
code that was on id Software's
website and they ported it to Java.
All right, actually, hang on.
I think I need to change
the video size here.
So these guys took this, like,
I don't know, 60,000,
70,000 lines of C code,
and they transliterated
it from C to Java.
And so why did they do this?
Because they love Java.
They wanted to see what they could do.
This is using the Java OpenGL binding,
just, by the way,
as the NASA WorldWinds software is.
So the Quake 2 thing is pure Java, okay,
sitting on top of the
OpenGL Java binding.
And for a long time, for several years,
they've actually been able to run
this by going to their web page,
clicking a Java Web Start launch link,
and then the game is running.
It's running on your machine.
There's no software
installation of any kind.
All you have to do is
have Java on your machine,
and then you click the link,
and the program runs.
Now, note the user experience
that we just had.
We just navigated to this web page,
right?
I'll reload it, okay?
So we just navigated to the web page.
You see, like,
a little spinner for a second.
Now, this could be cleaner,
but that's sort of in the... Oh,
got to change the video mode again.
Sorry.
I didn't save it before I...
[Transcript missing]
The model loader is a
little flaky in this thing.
All right, there we go.
Okay, so note again the user experience.
You go to the web page
and the game is running.
There's no software
installation of any kind.
You just have to have Java and the
new Java plugin on your machine,
and then you go to the web page and you
can get a fully hardware accelerated
OpenGL game running in the web browser,
all right?
This is, in my opinion,
the future of internet game distribution.
Web browser-based, full speed,
and just go there and it runs.
Now, there's one interesting
thing to point out,
which is that some slight adjustment
of the source code was needed in order
to make this thing run effectively,
and I didn't do a very good job with it.
I actually did that work, and basically,
this game is still rendering
typically when it exits,
and so it's doing like
OpenGL to the screen as the
web browser is tearing it down.
So it pretty much crashes
the JVM every time it exits.
And you would never notice,
because the new Java plugin
allows you to say specifically,
I want my applet to be
completely walled off,
be in a completely separate
JVM instance from every other one,
and that's honored,
and then you just don't see
any adverse side effects.
So you really can embed full power
desktop applications into the web
browser using Java technology.
Okay, I'm late already,
so let me do this last demo very quickly.
This is some of the latest
leading-edge content.
These are some applets built
using the new JavaFX technology.
And you may have heard about
this initiative from Sun,
but we're trying to make it really
much easier to develop rich graphical
content using the Java platform.
So these applets are
written not using Java,
but JavaFX, JavaFX script,
which is a declarative language that
makes it much more terse to write
really advanced visual effects.
So here's a stopwatch, okay?
It's got really nifty, whizzy effects.
It's got, like,
drop shadow on the main hand there.
It's got, you know,
drop shadows inside the numbers here.
Nice gradient-based glints
and stuff like this.
All right.
So this is very cool.
And it's actually full vector graphics.
So if you scaled this
thing up to full screen,
you would see the same visual fidelity
as you do inside the web page.
Okay?
Here's a...
Here's another example of,
this is a buddy list applet.
Okay, it shows you your friends' names
and their pictures and what
time it is where they live and
even what the weather is like,
okay.
A cool thing is that we can go over
here and click our friend's name.
We can even see where
they are on the globe,
all right.
So this applet,
this Java FX Script applet is embedding
the NASA WorldWinds Java component
as a portion of the FX Script applet.
This really shows a very
seamless transition from your
existing Java content to the
new world of Java FX Script and
the power that this brings you.
All right, so this is pretty neat.
Now,
let's say hypothetically speaking that
we think that the pals thing is really,
really useful.
Maybe it's even got an IM chat
client built in or something.
You say, well,
maybe we'd like this to stick around,
you know, after we've exited the webpage.
You know, maybe we don't want to have the
webpage around all the time that
we want to be interacting with it.
All right,
so this is actually pretty simple.
We can just come in here and
take the applet and drag it out
of the page onto our desktop.
Pow, okay.
Now we can go in here and we
can quit the web browser and
the applet is still running.
Okay,
there's a lot of ramifications to this.
Every applet,
if you design it in the way,
you have to opt into this
capability as a developer.
Okay, so don't be worried about, oh,
well, you know,
is anybody going to take my
applet and rip it off the page?
You have to opt in.
This is documented on
the JDK 6 release notes.
But basically, this is the new paradigm,
in my opinion,
for application deployments
on the internet.
Try before you buy.
Go to the web page, try out the app.
If you like it, you drag the running app
with all of its state.
Out onto your desktop,
that's the app installation experience.
And when you close down the web browser
or switch away from the web page,
you get an option to, for example,
create a desktop shortcut,
and that allows you to relaunch without
going back to the web browser later.
Okay,
and we are very much looking forward
to collaborating with the Java team
and Apple to make this a really
seamless and effective user experience
on the Macs that you get like a
.app created for your JNLP-based
applet as you drag it to the desktop.
And we think that it'll
be indistinguishable.
It's going to be a little bit
more flexible from a native
application ultimately and still
give you this awesome power of
being able to go from the web to
the desktop completely seamlessly.
So I'd like to go back to the slides,
please.
Okay, so please, please get involved.
Again, this is prototype software.
We cannot commit to a
release date at this point,
although we're collectively working
together as quickly as possible
to get this out there on the Mac.
It's already available
on other platforms.
So if you want,
please check out the release notes.
This is the website, jdk6.dev.java.net.
We'll take you everywhere you need to.
But if you go to the Plugin 2 sub-link,
that's where you can find
the information about it.
And please let us know what you think.
We're on the forums all the time,
so just go to forums.java.net,
go to the desktop forums,
then Java Plugin,
and give us your feedback.
So with that,
I'd like to turn it back over to Mike to
show you how to build really whizzy
Mac OS X user interfaces in Java.
Great.
Thank you, Ken.
So that was an amazing demo,
and I'm looking forward to
working with Ken and bringing
some great JavaFX apps to the Mac.
But what I'd like to talk about next
is what happens when you actually pull
those applications onto your desktop.
What are some things that you need to
do to actually make the app look like
it really belongs at home in Mac OS X?
And so there's three major
things that your app should do.
Your app should be bundled
like a Mac OS X app.
You should use a screen menu bar,
and we'll talk a little bit about
capturing application events.
So on Mac OS X,
when you build your Java application,
what winds up in your destination
directory after you're done compiling it
probably looks something a lot like this.
You have a bunch of jars,
you've got a bunch of resources,
you've got some class files,
you've got a run.bat,
because you're probably
deploying on other platforms.
But on Mac OS X, we don't do that.
We have a single unified .app that
we bundle everything that your
application requires inside of.
And so this allows for a
great end-user experience.
The end-user can just take this right
out of their downloads directory
or from a disk image and just drop
it in their applications folder.
And if they don't want it anymore,
they can just throw it away in the trash.
Easy, breezy, beautiful, just one drag.
So how do you do that for
your Java application?
Well, it all starts off with your icon.
You get some graphics from your
graphic designer or whoever
whips together your icon.
You drop that into icon composer.
And this may seem a little bit whimsical,
but you start off with your
ICNS when you get ready to deploy.
And then you take that and
you move it into jar bundler.
And you just drop that
into a little well there.
And then you take every other
component that's in that
destination directory of yours and
you can put that into jar bundler.
And take all of your jars and all
of your resources and everything.
And just, you know,
check the little check box
and click create application.
And that will generate a
single double-clickable
Java application on your desktop.
And in jar bundler,
we make it really easy
for you to use step two,
which is using the Mac menu bar.
Just by setting the Apple Laff
useScreenMenubar property,
what we'll do is we'll actually hoist
that menu bar out of your frame and
put it up at the top of the screen,
just like every other Mac application.
This is not something we
do by default because,
for compatibility reasons,
some Java applications were never thought
they would ever be run on the Mac,
so they might need that menu bar there.
But for anyone who's ever even looked
at their Java application on the Mac,
this is a property that should be
very easy for you to set and doesn't
have any real compatibility problems.
Set it early, set it often.
You can do it in your Info.plist.
Jarbundler helps you do that for you.
You can set it on the command
line if that's how you deploy.
You can set it in code.
However you like it, please set it.
And so the third thing I'd
like to talk about is handling
your application quit events.
And so what we do on Mac OS X when you
instantiate the AWT is that we create an
application menu for you automatically.
And that application
menu has a quit handler,
and when you hit Command-Q,
it triggers and fires off.
And we will do a system exit
zero and unceremoniously just
terminate your application because,
well,
we don't really know what the proper
shutdown routine is for your app.
So in order to get that knowledge,
you have to tell us.
If you have any sort of unsafe changes
or you need to push some state out
to the network or you need to do some
preference saving or something like that,
basically, you have to extend an
com.apple.eawt application adapter.
And it's in the handle quit
method that you override.
That's where you can tell us, well,
now is a good time to quit.
You know, this is where you can start
doing your shutdown routine.
Or you can say now is
not a good time to quit.
We have unsafe changes.
We need to prompt the user for that.
And you set the event set handle
to false as opposed to true.
So it's very easy to set up.
You just implement this.
You extend this adapter or
you implement the application.
You add the application interface.
And just add that to com.apple.eawt
application add application listener.
For the rest of the time,
I'd like to talk about what you can
do to add an extra little polish
and shine to your application.
Some things that you can do in a
mostly platform-independent way,
in many cases,
really make your app pop and really
amaze and delight your end users.
So we've got a bunch of
features to talk about,
so let's start on client properties.
Client properties are the
most platform-independent,
very neutral way that you can
actually add just a little bit of
custom behavior or appearance to
your application that actually has
no effect on any other platform.
The root jComponent object has a
putClientProperty method on it that
takes a string and an object key.
And you just mark your
components as having,
you know, like a jComponent size,
and it's just ignored on all other
platforms or any other look and feel.
And on the Mac, when you launch your app,
it just has a little
extra something special.
And so you can go from an app just
like this that we saw in Tom's talk,
which has no modifications and no
custom client properties at all,
to something more like this,
which looks more like Safari and
has nice segmented controls
and a beautiful search box.
So let's dive in.
So let's dive a little bit into that.
So jComponent size variant
allows you to specify whether
you want smaller controls.
We set this on buttons and sliders
and a bunch of other components.
We have a tech note where you can check
out all of the ones that they apply to.
Small components are good when you
want to kind of cluster and bring
controls together in sort of a subgroup.
Many controls should probably only
be used very sparingly because
they actually are very small.
But in this case,
we're going to use a little bit
of a different type of control.
In some cases,
if you have like a palette and
you need some sort of really
small clustering and grouping,
occasionally a mini checkbox or a
mini slider might be appropriate.
Another client property
which applies to buttons,
we've actually had since
Mac OS 10.2 in Java 1.4,
and these are the three
styles that we supported.
But in Leopard,
we added a whole bunch more.
The textured button looks really
good on textured-style windows,
round-wrecked for kind of
HTML-style layouts and views where
you have your own buttons there.
We even have a little purple help
button as well that you often see in
the little corner of system preferences.
So another modifier that you can add to
the button type is the segment position.
And this actually allows you to
create whole bars and kind of long
controls that you can toggle between,
just like you can toggle between the
views in the Finder or in iTunes.
And so if you put your buttons
into a layout manager that directly
abut these components together,
you actually get them to
fit together in a nice,
single, cohesive control.
And we'll take care of automatically
scaling everything for you in high DPI.
And your app should look just great.
So another client property that we added
to text fields was the search variant.
And this was something that we know
you guys have asked for quite a lot.
And we've added a lot of default
behavior to this automatically.
When you click the little cancel icon,
we clear out the text for you.
When you start typing,
a little cancel icon appears.
We also will add a pop-down next
to the magnifying glass for you
if you attach a pop-up to this in
another client property as well.
And in order to really capture all of
the events that are going on inside this,
if you want to implement sort of a live
search feature like you see in iTunes,
you really want to attach a
little cancel icon to this.
And when you click the
little cancel icon,
we clear out the text for you.
And when you start typing,
a little cancel icon appears.
The next series of client
properties I'd like to talk about
are actually applied to Windows.
And so you can take your window and put a
little document proxy icon up at the top,
just like you see in a
lot of Cocoa applications,
simply by setting the window document
file client property to a Java.io
file that actually represents the
document that that window represents.
What this will do is it'll give
you this little pop-up if you
right-click or command-click on that,
and it'll also make the
icon draggable as well,
just like in any other Cocoa application,
because, unsurprisingly,
the Java AWT is based on Cocoa.
We also allow you to set
the document modified bit.
If you have any sort of
unsafe changes in that window,
it's a little hint to the
user that if you click close,
you're going to get
something to pop out and say,
hey, you have unsafe changes, you know,
please save.
We also allow you to customize
your window to be able to use
it in a lot of different ways.
We also allow you to customize
the window style itself.
So if you have something
kind of like a palette,
we'll actually let you set the
palette style on that window.
And you do that with window style
and give it the key of small.
We also allow you to take your window,
and you can implement a lot
of custom effects with them.
And so you can change the opacity,
and you can determine whether
or not the window has shadow.
So if you want to do something
really snazzy that would require
a transparent overlay window,
we allow you to do that as well
now using client properties.
and finally,
a feature that we added in Java 6
was window document modal sheets.
And so if you use the
Java Document Modality API to
specify that your JDialog is document
modal to a particular J frame,
and you set the window
document modal sheet property,
we will automatically turn
that into a sheet for you and
animate it in and animate it out
based on your set visible true,
set visible false.
We don't set this
automatically for you though,
because in some cases, some applications,
we're never expecting to be
run on a Mac or have some sort
of document modal behavior,
automatically get rid of the window
accoutrements on their JDialog.
So if they never put a cancel or
don't save button in their dialog,
and they were depending on
you to click the little check,
click the close box on the window, well,
sheets don't have close boxes.
So unfortunately we
can't set it by default,
but we really wish we could.
So finally,
that's sort of a conclusion of all the
client properties I'd like to talk about.
Next,
I'd like to show you various things that
we've installed inside of the UI manager.
So the UI manager in Swing is sort of a
common bucket of colors and properties
and borders and strings and objects
that are installed by the look and feel.
And so the Aqua look and feel
installs the focus color,
which allows you to actually get
at whether the user is specified
there in blue or there in graphite
in the appearance preference pane.
Also in the appearance preference pane,
the user can also choose a very
different selection color as well.
And so on Mac OS X,
we actually make a distinction
between the text selection color,
which is a very light variant,
in this case, a very light orange.
And it's designed to select text on a
field of black text on a field of white.
So it's, you know, it's,
you won't have to invert the text color.
Unlike the list selection background,
which we use for lists,
J tables and J trees,
which is actually a much darker
color that's supposed to highlight
the fact that something is selected.
And so the selection background
color is a lot darker.
And then some cases will
actually invert the color of
the text for you automatically.
If you're implementing any
sort of custom controls,
you can rely on the
selection background color.
And then you can also use
these three client properties,
or you can rely on these three
UI manager values to be set for
you that you can take and pull out.
And always, you know,
check for null in case you're
running under a different look and
feel or on another platform where,
say, focus color is not available.
And so you can use these to
implement your custom controls.
Another great feature that we've
installed in the UI Manager is
an aqua-style border.
This will take the default titled border,
which by default just has
an etched border variant,
and will actually give
you the full layering,
descending aqua-style grouping.
So this is how you access it.
It's in titled border.
Aqua variant is the value that you
need to pull out of the UI Manager.
And if you actually want to set
it for every single title board
in your entire application,
you can actually tell the UI Manager,
I'd like to install this titled
border as the titled border border.
And so that will unilaterally change
it for every titled border that
you have inside your application.
And obviously it takes up more space.
It'll affect your layout.
If you're using good layout managers,
that shouldn't be too much of a problem.
But another caveat of this is that
you have to take the components
that you put inside of those panels
that you apply this border to,
you have to take them and set them
set visible or set opaque false.
And so what that'll do is
allow you to actually see this
nice layering descending in.
Otherwise,
J panels by default are set opaque true.
[Transcript missing]
Another improvised painter that
we've installed as a border is the
even and odd row background color,
which will change automatically for you,
whether you're using blue
or you're using graphite.
So that's sort of a brief
overview of things that we've
installed in the UI manager.
Next,
I'd like to talk about some stuff that
is more custom to Mac OS X that is not
necessarily as platform independent,
but I think you'll agree
that it's pretty cool.
So we in Java 6 allow for a lot
more native dock integration.
By setting a pop-up menu on
your comApple E-AWT application,
we allow you to specify what comes
up above the items that are provided
for you automatically by the system.
And so this allows you to
[Transcript missing]
But the most exciting thing
that I think we've added in
Java 6 is AppleScript support.
And so JavaScript is a new API that
was added to Java 6 that allows
anyone to provide a script engine
implementation to run any sort
of arbitrary scripting language.
And at Apple, we thought, well,
this is fantastic.
We could expose AppleScript to
Java applications,
and you can tell applications
like iTunes to do things.
So we fully implemented object
marshalling for parameters to
scripts as well as return types.
And so this is how you do it.
You ask for the
AppleScript engine by name,
and then you can do things like
tell iTunes to get the current
track and get the data of the
first artwork of that track.
And what it will return
to you is an object,
a Java object.
In this case,
a Java AWT image that you can put inside.
So you can take a copy of an
image icon and put it in a
label and throw it up in JFrame,
and you have the full image
automatically marshaled for you
with zero work on your part.
So we automatically coerce images,
strings, numbers, lists, and maps.
In AppleScript's case,
they called them description, or,
and others.
Thank you.
So we automatically coerce them back and
forth between their Java object types,
and so this is an example of taking --
of getting the Apple Script Engine and
actually using that to pass
some parameters to the finder.
In this case, you set the JavaX script
function that we want to call,
in this case doTrash,
and we'll specify that we want an
argument to go down into that script.
And so in this case,
you set the script engine
argv in the bindings,
and then you do the call to
doTrash and tells finder to,
you know,
take that file string and treat it like
a POSIX file and toss it to the trash.
So we think this is really powerful,
and we think that a lot of
applications will want to do this,
you know,
to get sort of native integration
with other apps like iPhoto
and iTunes and Mail and,
well,
just about anything that's in your dock.
So where can we find
all of these properties?
Well, we wrote up a tech note, 2196,
that describes a lot of the
swing client properties.
We also have a lot of really hidden gems
inside of the release notes for Java on
Mac OS X v10.5 update 1 release notes.
And so those were the
release notes for Java 6.
And we're hoping to get more
documentation about this stuff
out to you very soon and get some
sort of example code as opposed to
just cryptic little release notes.
So sort of in summary,
what did we talk about today?
We talked about a lot.
So we've got Java tools.
Use Ant to build your projects.
This has great integration
with Xcode and Eclipse and
NetBeans and all the Java IDEs.
We have some great performance
tools with Shark and Instruments.
And check out Dtrace if you haven't.
There's some really powerful
things you can do all the way
from your Java functions all the
way down to the kernel syscalls.
We talked a lot about 64-bit
since that's very important
for the conference this week.
It's on by default for Snow Leopard.
You should be able to get great
performance effectively for free.
We had Scott talk about...
How SWT is moving to Cocoa and the
fantastic contributions that they're
making to the SWT Cocoa port.
Ken showed us a really fantastic
demo of out-of-process applets and
moving applets out of the browser.
And then finally,
I told you about some three basic
things that your app needs to do
once you get it onto the desktop
to actually be a good Mac citizen.
And then finally,
we just finished up with
using client properties.
And UI manager values for
platform-independent customization
that really looks great on the Mac.
As well as some custom EWT dock
integration to allow you to
customize your dock icon.
And finished up with AppleScript.
So, in conclusion,
these are some places you can go.
The Java Dev mailing list is
absolutely fantastic for anybody
who's new to the platform.
There's a lot of friendly faces
there to help you get going.
With any problems you might have.
And there's a lot of senior people there
who come talk to us as Apple engineers.
Because we hang out there, too.
And we'll occasionally pipe
up about something that's
particularly sniggly or some sort
of preferred way to do something.
So, we've got a bunch of
documentation and sample code.
Please do come to the labs that
are on Wednesday and Thursday.
Bright and early, 9 a.m.
One's in the Infotech lab
and the other's in Mac Lab A.
They're going to be available to you.
They're two different spaces,
but they're both on the same floor.
And with that,
I'd like to invite everyone up for Q&A.